---
title: "Compiling Go to WASM"
date: 2025-01-16
description: "I share my experience compiling Go to WASM for a side project."
tags:
  - Go
  - WASM
  - TypeScript
---

## Background

Last year I wrote [a type-checker for Golang](https://github.com/garciat/gobid)
(written in Go) whose aim is to expand the language's type inference
capabilities by using
[bidirectional typechecking](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/bidirectional+typechecking).
(It's just a small "what if" experiment.)

It was my first experience with that technique. In retrospect, I think I did a
decent job but I am sure I did not grasp the concept fully at the time. For
example, I would've liked to split my AST in the way that Conor McBride
describes in
[this talk on type systems](https://youtu.be/21bUrFEX4jI?si=vCzErmbIYeGPQjK9&t=1585).

As I developed the type-checker, I found myself repeatedly clearing my terminal
screen and re-running the tool to check its output. My write-run-debug loop was
inefficient. So I put together a tiny web app.

The web app consisted of a frontend and a backend. The frontend makes use of
[Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) to display two code
editors side by side (_a la_ [Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/)) -- one
to edit the source Go code and one to display the tool's output. The backend
receives `POST /compile` requests from the frontend every time the user edits
the source code; the input is the user's code as text, and the output is the
type-checker's internal logs.

Admittedly, I spent too much time on this (I have a weak spot for webdev), but
it worked out pretty well.

...and it wasn't long before I wanted to share my work with friends and
colleagues 😄. So I used [Google Cloud Run](https://cloud.google.com/run)'s free
tier to build and deploy the app, which gave me access to
[a public URL for the app](https://gobid-922992323762.us-central1.run.app/).

For the time being, I was satisfied with all the work that I did. And I moved
on.

Fast forward to a few weeks ago...

During the holidays, I had enough time and energy to finally pour some love into
my personal website. It had been neglected for years, and one of the reasons for
such neglect was my annoyance of working with Ruby and
[Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/). I just found it clunky and uninteresting.

On my search for alternative static site generators, I found
[Lume](https://lume.land/). It is a dead-simple, batteries-included framework
that _just works_. But more importantly, it _just makes sense_. I was instantly
delighted, so I spent the following days moving every site that I own (mainly
GitHub Pages) to Lume. I had lots of fun and was extremely productive using
Deno, Lume, TypeScript, and Preact.

And then it hit me: What if I don't need a backend for my type-checker web app?
Could I also turn it into a statically-built website?

The answer was yes. I was able to replace the backend call with a direct call to
the type-checker compiled as [WASM](https://webassembly.org/). That allowed me
to get rid of the Google Cloud deployment and simply build the app with Lume and
deploy it for free to GitHub Pages.

So, that's the _why_. Now, let's focus on the _how_.

## Compiling and running

(Note: I'm currently running Go version `1.23.4`.)

Compiling Go to WASM ([docs](https://go.dev/wiki/WebAssembly)) is pleasantly
simple and easy:

```bash
GOOS=js GOARCH=wasm go build -o build/main.wasm github.com/garciat/gobid/cmd/main
```

To my surprise, the command ran successfully on the first try without any
changes at all to the codebase. Props to the Golang dev team.

In order to execute the code,
[the documentation](https://go.dev/wiki/WebAssembly#getting-started) asks us to
copy the file `"$(go env GOROOT)/misc/wasm/wasm_exec.js"` into our project and
to import it as a helper script:

```html
<script src="wasm_exec.js"></script>
<script>
  const go = new Go();
  WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(fetch("main.wasm"), go.importObject)
    .then((result) => {
      go.run(result.instance);
    });
</script>
```

I did so, and it worked. I saw the following logged into the developer console:

```
wasm_exec.js:22 === CheckPackageDeclarations ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === CheckPackageCycles ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === ResolvePackageNames(main) ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === Loading Package (main) ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === Checking Package (main) ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === Verifying Package (main) ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === Verify ===
wasm_exec.js:22 === iteration 0 ===
wasm_exec.js:22 Context:
{} || {}
wasm_exec.js:22 Steps:
wasm_exec.js:22 === DONE ===
wasm_exec.js:22 {{  }}
```

But, wait, there's more.

My tool's `main` executable is meant to be called with file paths passed as
commandline arguments. For example:

```bash
go run github.com/garciat/gobid/cmd/main hello.go
```

I needed to be able to:

1. Provide program arguments. (`os.Args`)
2. Provide readable files.
3. Capture `stdout` into a JS string, instead of `console.log`.

I could'ved skipped points 1 and 2 by changing the program to read from `stdin`
instead. That would've been good enough for an MVP. But for whatever reason I
chose to stick to its original behavior. How hard could that be?

## Providing program arguments

This is actually easy to do:

```javascript
const go = new Go();
go.argv.push("hello.go");
// ...
```

But how did I figure that out?
[Go's official documentation for WebAssembly](https://go.dev/wiki/WebAssembly)
does not document the interface of the `Go` object provided by the support
library.

Our only options are to either
[read the file itself](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/go1.23.4/misc/wasm/wasm_exec.js)
to infer its API, or to read the code of one of the many provided
[example apps](https://go.dev/wiki/WebAssembly#further-examples).

As we'll see further on, this will not be our last problem with
_underspecification_.

## Providing readable files

The `wasm_exec.js` support file
([link](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/go1.23.4/misc/wasm/wasm_exec.js#L14))
gives us a hint as to how filesystem access works in Go-WASM:

```javascript
if (!globalThis.fs) {
  let outputBuf = "";
  globalThis.fs = {
    constants: {/** ... */},
    writeSync(fd, buf) {
      // ...
    },
    // Several more methods like:
    // write, chmod, chown, etc.
  };
}
```

That piece of code seems to be defining a Node.js-like filesystem interface. But
there are essentially zero direct source references to `fs` in the
`wasm_exec.js` file itself. How is this being used then?

It turns out that the Go standard library file `src/syscall/fs_js.go`
([link](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/go1.23.4/src/syscall/fs_js.go)) reads
the `fs` global variable like so:

```go
// NOTE: some lines were redacted away for brevity

package syscall

import (
  "syscall/js"
)

var jsFS = js.Global().Get("fs")
var constants = jsFS.Get("constants")

func Ftruncate(fd int, length int64) error {
  _, err := fsCall("ftruncate", fd, length)
  return err
}

func fsCall(name string, args ...any) (js.Value, error) {
  type callResult struct {
    val js.Value
    err error
  }

  c := make(chan callResult, 1)
  f := js.FuncOf(func(this js.Value, args []js.Value) any {
    var res callResult

    if len(args) >= 1 { // on Node.js 8, fs.utimes calls the callback without any arguments
      if jsErr := args[0]; !jsErr.IsNull() {
        res.err = mapJSError(jsErr)
      }
    }

    res.val = js.Undefined()
    if len(args) >= 2 {
      res.val = args[1]
    }

    c <- res
    return nil
  })
  defer f.Release()
  jsFS.Call(name, append(args, f)...)
  res := <-c
  return res.val, res.err
}
```

From this, we may infer the following:

- Go expects a global name `fs`.
- Go redirects filesystem syscalls to method calls on `fs`.
- The syscall API mimicks Node.js's [fs module](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html).
  - Go relies on specific overloads of each function.
  - For example: Node.js's `fs.ftruncate`
    ([link](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fsftruncatefd-len-callback)) may be
    called with `fd, callback` or with `fd, len, callback`, but Go only uses the
    `fd, len, callback` overload.
- All syscalls are callback-based.
  - The Go callback specifically expects `null` when there is no error. I.e.
    `undefined` or some other falsey value will not do.

A Google search for `"nodejs fs on browser"` eventually led me to
[ZenFS](https://zenfs.dev/core/), a browser-compatible filesystem emulation
library that is compatible with Node.js's `fs` API.

I tried doing the following:

```javascript
import { fs } from "https://esm.sh/@zenfs/core";
globalThis.fs = fs;
const go = new Go();
fs.writeFileSync("main.go", "package main\n");
go.argv.push("main.go");
```

But it did not work right away. After hours of debugging, I found that I needed
to write
[quite a bit of custom code](https://github.com/Garciat/gobid/blob/640f10569d2e2a0751be3a0405ac727213cc61cc/gh-pages/src/lib/go-fs.ts)
to get ZenFS to work with Go's implicit expectations and in order to work around
some of ZenFS's strange behavior.

In summary, I defined a `GoFileSystemAdapter` class that wraps a ZenFS
`FileSystem` object and exposes it as the Node.js-like `fs` API that Go expects.

## Capturing `stdout`

ZenFS itself has no support for any of the standard streams. I ended up manually
creating `/dev/stdout` and `/dev/stderr` files and redirecting operations on
file descriptors `1` and `2` respectively.

I did not spend time on enabling `/dev/stdin`, though, because I did not need
it.

I also could've implemented
[a custom ZenFS Device](https://zenfs.dev/core/#devices-and-device-files) that
more accurately mimicks the usual `stdin` and `stdout` behavior. But the above
was sufficient for my use case.

Upon calling `GoFileSystemAdapter#finalize()`, I close and fully read those
special files and return their contents as JS strings.

## Updating `wasm_exec.js` to JS modules

I also spent some time modifying `wasm_exec.js` to make it easier to import as a
JS module. More specifically, I made the following changes:

I converted the file extension `.ts` for TypeScript support. This allowed me to
explicitly define the expected API of the filesystem FFI. For example:

```typescript
export interface GoFileSystemError extends Error {
  readonly errno: number;
  readonly code: string;
}

export type GoFileSystemCallback<T> = (
  err: GoFileSystemError | null,
  value?: T,
) => void;

export interface GoFileSystemFFI {
  // ...

  write(
    fd: number,
    buf: Uint8Array,
    offset: number,
    length: number,
    position: number | null,
    callback: GoFileSystemCallback<number>,
  ): void;

  // ...
}
```

Then, I changed the constructor of `new Go(...)` to take in `fs` and `process`
as parameters instead of reading them from `globalThis`; and I used
`export class Go` instead of `globalThis.Go = class Go`.

Sadly, because Go's dependency on `globalThis.fs` happens in the standard
library, it would've been a pain to change this. I had previously
[hacked on the Go compiler](https://github.com/Garciat/go/commit/c69063fec8c28462369e3f513a2fad883fd3f9c6),
but I did not want to go down this path at the time. (I will consider it in the
future.)

Finally, I renamed the file to `wasm_exec@1.23.4.ts` in order to make it clear
that it is tied to Go version 1.23.4.

## Putting it all together

In the end, my 'compile' function ended up looking like this. I named the
function `gobid`, because that's the name I chose for the type-checker back when
I started it (it is a _portmanteau_ of Go and Bidirectional).

```javascript
import { createFS } from "./go-fs.ts";
import { process } from "./go-process.ts";
import { Go } from "./wasm_exec@1.23.4.ts";

type Path = string;
type GoSourceCode = string;

export async function gobid(
  inputs: Record<Path, GoSourceCode>,
): Promise<string> {
  const fs = await createFS();

  const go = new Go(fs, process);

  for (const [path, source] of Object.entries(inputs)) {
    fs.writeFileSync(path, source);
    go.argv.push(path);
  }

  const source = await WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(
    fetch(import.meta.resolve("../build/main.wasm")),
    go.importObject,
  );

  await go.run(source.instance);

  const { stdout, stderr } = fs.finalize();

  if (stderr) {
    return stderr;
  }

  return stdout;
}
```

Although `globalThis` shenanigans do end up happening, at the very least those
details do not leak into the client code.

## Check it out

You can access the web app here:
[https://garciat.com/gobid/](https://garciat.com/gobid/)

## Conclusions

Go's WASM support works well, but it is sorely underspecified. It would be great
if its JS FFI contract were strictly specified in their documentation and,
ideally, with TypeScript interfaces (or at least with
[JSDoc types](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/jsdoc-supported-types.html)).

Go's filesystem JS FFI reliance on a global `fs` object makes it hard to isolate
WASM instances. As an alternative, the syscall code could use the `Go` object
instance itself as a top-level scope and read `fs` and other FFI dependencies
off it directly.
[GitHub issue #56084](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/56084) proposed a
similar approach back in 2022, but no changes have been landed since.

`wasm_exec.js` does not leverage modern JavaScript features like
[modules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules)
(aka ESM), and is otherwise too coupled to Node.js API expectations. Also,
rather than copying the file off the local Go installation, it would be more
convenient to be able to download or import it from NPM or JSR. For example:

`import { Go } from "jsr:@go/wasm-ffi@1.23.4"`

Finally, implementing a fully-compliant filesystem for the Go JS FFI is
non-trivial and there are no ready-made solutions available, as far as I can
tell.
